[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen. I live in Mumbai and I feel a mix of sympathy and
[Amit Varma]: schadenfreude from my friends in Delhi. When they're not complaining about the government,
[Amit Varma]: they complain about the smog. Well, I wanted to dig a little deeper into the causes of
[Amit Varma]: this Delhi smog and what insights a little economic thinking could give me on it. So
[Amit Varma]: I've invited my friend and a frequent guest on the show, Vivek Kaul. Vivek has written
[Amit Varma]: many books and he's a columnist for Equity Master for whom he wrote a newsletter with
[Amit Varma]: the title, The Economic Cause of the Delhi Smog. That's exactly what I want to get to
[Amit Varma]: the heart of today. Vivek, welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit for having me over.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me more about the root causes of Delhi's smog.
[Guest]: Okay. So that could take an entire show. So that's the idea. Okay. So you see, basically,
[Guest]: you know, the rice that is grown in Punjab is mechanically harvested. And what that does
[Guest]: is the harvesters cut and clean the rice from the paddy and leave behind the straws on the
[Guest]: field. Now these straws are six to eight inches in height. Okay. You know, when the rice harvesting
[Guest]: season ends, the wheat season is about to start and the gap is two to three weeks. So
[Guest]: the farmers who have been growing rice now need to grow wheat and the time period available
[Guest]: is not much. So they need to get rid of the straw very, very quickly. Okay. Obviously,
[Guest]: you know, they could hire laborers and, you know, get them to cut the straw, but that
[Guest]: would involve spending money. There are machines that are available, you know, which sort of
[Guest]: take care of these straw and also sort of plant the seeds to grow wheat. But that also
[Guest]: involves, you know, spending a lot of money. So the farmers take the easiest way out, which
[Guest]: is they just light a match and they burn the straw. And this straw is also, in case my
[Amit Varma]: listeners are confused, this straw is also referred to as stubble. It is referred to
[Amit Varma]: as stubble as well. Yes. So essentially the core cause of Delhi's pollution is farmers
[Amit Varma]: in Punjab who are burning the stubble and not so much the vehicular traffic of Delhi
[Amit Varma]: per se. And you know, the last time, for example, Arvind Kejriwal did his whole odd even thing,
[Amit Varma]: it had negligible impact on the air of Delhi and I believe he's planning to do it again.
[Guest]: But that's just optics. The root cause, the problem that you have to solve is the stubble.
[Guest]: And you know, what happens is, now obviously, you know, the listeners might want to know
[Guest]: as to why nothing happens when wheat is harvested. Now, the stubble or the straw that wheat leaves
[Guest]: behind is low on silica content. Or rather the stubble or the straw that rice leaves
[Guest]: behind is high on silica content. And hence that cannot be cut and fed to animals, okay,
[Guest]: which the wheat straw can be. So hence the farmers really don't have any option other
[Guest]: than sort of burning it. I mean, there are, you know, I mean, I've read news reports where,
[Guest]: you know, this straw can be used as an input into paperboards, etc. But then, you know,
[Guest]: paperboards are made all through the year. And this straw is available only for a very
[Guest]: limited period. So that doesn't leave the farmer with many options.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting insight I got from reading your newsletter for Equity Master on the subject
[Amit Varma]: was that for Punjab to grow rice is actually not a natural thing. It's an unnatural set
[Amit Varma]: of circumstances that has made of Punjab one of the leaders in growing rice.
[Guest]: Yes. So Punjab is basically a semi-arid region. And you know, to grow rice, you need a lot
[Guest]: of water. So Punjab in the first place should not be growing rice. But Punjab grows a lot
[Guest]: of rice. It's the third largest grower of rice in India after West Bengal and Uttar
[Guest]: Pradesh. In 2015-16, it produced around 11.85 million tons of rice. Now what happens is
[Guest]: that the government of India procures rice and wheat primarily from the farmers using
[Guest]: institutions like the Food Corporation of India in order to distribute that rice and
[Guest]: wheat through the public distribution system, which, you know, is essentially a chain of
[Guest]: more than 5 lakh ration shops all throughout the country.
[Guest]: Now, the funny bit is that nearly one-fourth of the rice that the government of India procures
[Guest]: all through the country is procured in Punjab. So in 2015-16, around 9.35 million tons of
[Guest]: the 11.85 million tons which was produced was procured by the government. So the Punjab
[Guest]: farmer has a ready sort of customer in the government of India. He doesn't have to sort
[Amit Varma]: of go looking around to sell the rice that he produces.
[Amit Varma]: So he doesn't have to worry about market dynamics. He knows that the rice will be sold. He knows
[Guest]: at what price it will be sold.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is that the, you know, Punjab as a state is a roti-eating state.
[Guest]: So almost all the rice that they produce is sold. Very little gets consumed within the
[Guest]: state. What is not bought by the government is bought by the private traders.
[Amit Varma]: So, ghar ki roti, rice parabar.
[Guest]: Ghar ki roti, rice parabar. The other thing that is, you know, that sort of essentially
[Guest]: ensures that the Punjab farmer grows rice is the fact that electricity is free in Punjab.
[Guest]: And this ensures that the farmers can use, you know, can pump a lot of water which is
[Guest]: needed to produce rice.
[Guest]: So you know, just to give you a sense of comparison, you know, when Punjab is the most productive
[Guest]: state in India when it comes to rice. It produces close to 39.74 quintals of rice per hectare.
[Guest]: Okay. But this calculation does not take the amount of water that it uses to produce that
[Guest]: rice.
[Guest]: So in a state like West Bengal, you know, you require around 2, 1, 6, 9 litres of water
[Guest]: to produce 1 kg of rice.
[Guest]: That's a lot of water.
[Guest]: But in a state like Punjab, you require almost double the amount. It's around 4,100 litres
[Guest]: and a little more than that.
[Guest]: So what that tells you is that there are two wrong incentives essentially, which are encouraging
[Guest]: the Punjabi farmer to produce rice.
[Guest]: One is the fact that there is a ready customer in the government available, you know, buys
[Guest]: rice and the fact that an unlimited amount of water can be pumped because electricity
[Guest]: is free.
[Guest]: Okay. So that ensures that Punjab produces a lot of rice. And once Punjab produces a
[Guest]: lot of rice, obviously, you know, it is left with a lot of stubble, which the farmers burn
[Guest]: so that they can quickly move towards producing wheat.
[Guest]: Over the years, you know, the government has done a few things here and there and there
[Guest]: is a fine which sort of, you know, the farmers who burn the stubble need to pay.
[Guest]: And this fine is essentially, you know, it starts at around rupees 2,500 on burning these
[Guest]: after harvest rice straw on a land of up to two acres.
[Guest]: Then there is 5,000 for land measuring two to five acres, 7,000 fine for a land greater
[Guest]: than five acres and less than 10 acres.
[Guest]: And beyond that, there's a fine of 15,000 rupees.
[Guest]: So you know, the fine is so low that it essentially makes sense for the farmer to burn the stubble
[Guest]: rather than hire labor and get the labor to cut that stubble or straw.
[Guest]: So the fine does not work.
[Guest]: And even if the fine was higher, it would just be a rent seeking outlet, you just give
[Guest]: a bribe to the inspector.
[Guest]: Yes. And more than that, you know, I mean, as I keep saying, the capacity of governments
[Guest]: in India to do anything is very, very limited.
[Guest]: So, you know, there is no data from satellite imaging, which shows satellite data shows
[Guest]: that there were 40,510 fire incidents in Punjab alone between September 27 and November 9.
[Guest]: Now, you know, 40,000 is a huge number.
[Guest]: You know, how many of those farmers, you know, could the government go and fine?
[Guest]: It just doesn't make.
[Guest]: So fines don't make any sense.
[Guest]: I mean, they do not dissuade the farmers from burning the straw.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, one of the one of the news reports I read, and it had quoted a farmer
[Guest]: and who summarized, you know, the situation very well.
[Guest]: It's, you know, he basically said that, you know, you just need to light one matchstick.
[Guest]: So you're essentially competing against that.
[Guest]: I mean, it's as convenient as just lighting a matchstick.
[Amit Varma]: So in terms of both actual cost and opportunity cost, you can't beat that.
[Amit Varma]: That's the simplest way for them to.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so now, the political economy of this is interesting, that these are we know the
[Amit Varma]: two things that the government does wrong, that a there are the MSPs for rice and it
[Amit Varma]: guarantees that it will procure so much so the procurement system is messed up and doesn't
[Amit Varma]: go is not aligned with market signals.
[Amit Varma]: And two, there's a free electricity.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is really the Delhi smog is actually an unseen effect of free power to farmers
[Amit Varma]: in Punjab, to a large extent, which is not an obvious connection now, because farmers
[Amit Varma]: are both an important vote bank and a wealthy vote bank.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, farmers in Punjab, I mean, Kali Dal is a party of large farmers, basically
[Amit Varma]: of large farmers, and they can afford to buy other parties per se, if the need so requires.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, politically, the political will to actually do something about this, no matter
[Amit Varma]: what you might say, becomes sort of problematic.
[Amit Varma]: And much as I am not a fan of KG wallet, then makes me wonder that what is a poor guy to
[Amit Varma]: do?
[Amit Varma]: He's got a problem in Delhi, which is caused by something that the farmers of Punjab are
[Amit Varma]: doing.
[Amit Varma]: And the farmers of Punjab don't give a shit.
[Amit Varma]: And they've effectively bought, I mean, the Punjab government has to cater to their wishes.
[Guest]: So what is the way out?
[Guest]: I mean, the way out is essentially, I mean, and again, this is a solution, which may not
[Guest]: have political will, but I think this is, you know, one of the solutions going around.
[Guest]: So you have to essentially disincentivize the farmers in Punjab from growing as much
[Guest]: rice as they do.
[Guest]: Now, that can happen.
[Guest]: How can that happen?
[Guest]: It can happen by essentially ensuring that the Food Corporation of India sets up more
[Guest]: procurement centers in states where it's not buying a lot of rice.
[Guest]: Now take the example of a state like West Bengal.
[Guest]: Now West Bengal produces around 15.7, rather it produced in 2015-16 around 15.75 million
[Guest]: tons of rice.
[Guest]: Of that only around 10% got procured.
[Guest]: Now even though, you know, West Bengal is a rice eating state.
[Guest]: Now so what that does is given that the government procures very little, a lot of that rice ends
[Guest]: up being sold at a price which is lower than the MSP.
[Guest]: Now this is also true about states like Bihar and Assam.
[Guest]: So obviously, you know, these are states, you know, Bihar, West Bengal, you know, they're
[Guest]: in the Gangetic plain.
[Guest]: So there is a lot of water going around to grow rice.
[Guest]: So more procurement needs to happen in these states and procurement needs to move out from
[Guest]: a state like Punjab.
[Guest]: Number one.
[Guest]: The second thing is, you obviously, you know, once they don't grow rice, they need to grow
[Guest]: something else.
[Guest]: So one of the options that, you know, a gentleman called Ajayveer Jakhar, who is, you know,
[Guest]: sort of, you can call him an agriculture economist, made was that the farmers in Punjab should
[Guest]: be encouraged to grow maize.
[Guest]: Now which would happen only once the government sort of starts procuring maize.
[Guest]: Now the government of India right now only procures rice and wheat.
[Guest]: And given the fact that our private, you know, the private markets in agriculture are so
[Guest]: screwed up that expecting a solution from there is, you know, is very difficult.
[Guest]: So the procurement needs to move out from Punjab and it needs to go to other states.
[Guest]: And once, you know, this, the procurement is spread around, even if there is, you know,
[Guest]: the stubble is burnt, it won't cause so much problem because the production of rice would
[Guest]: sort of, and procurement of rice would be spread over a larger area.
[Guest]: The second part is, you know, in states like Bihar and West Bengal, labor is still cheaper,
[Guest]: you know, vis-a-vis a state like Punjab, which is a fairly rich state.
[Guest]: So there, you know, you can still hire people to sort of cut the stubble and get rid of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So this needs to happen.
[Guest]: Now the question obviously is whether this will happen or not.
[Guest]: And the answer is no, because, you know, the rich farmers of Punjab have been used to the
[Guest]: government buying their rice over the years.
[Guest]: And this is essentially again, one of the things that has happened because of the Green
[Guest]: Revolution in the state.
[Guest]: You know, when initially farmers started, you know, newer varieties of wheat were sort
[Guest]: of imported from Mexico and the farmers were essentially encouraged to grow that wheat.
[Guest]: The government, in order to support those farmers, also started to buy that wheat.
[Guest]: And over a period of time, you know, it started to buy rice as well.
[Guest]: So this is a system which has been in place for close to, you know, four and a half to
[Guest]: five decades, and it will not be very easy to unravel it.
[Amit Varma]: My slightly skeptical take on the solutions you mentioned, I mean, I know they're not
[Amit Varma]: your solutions, or the solutions that are generally out there.
[Amit Varma]: But my skeptical take on those two solutions were that they're both coming from a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a central planning mindset.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one being that you do more procurement in the Gangetic states like Bengal and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: And the other being that you also start procuring maize or whatever and try to change the incentives
[Amit Varma]: that way.
[Amit Varma]: So while I think that the whole central planning mindset rather is fundamentally flawed and
[Guest]: has led to this problem in the first place, which will bring me to another question.
[Guest]: I'll just elaborate on this.
[Guest]: Yes, if you just let me.
[Guest]: So I mean, I'm not a supporter of central planning in any way.
[Guest]: But you know, what happens Amit, when a system is in place, you cannot just automatically,
[Guest]: you know, let it go and move towards another system.
[Guest]: That causes an even bigger, look at what demonetization did.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it essentially demonetization came right out of the central planning mindset.
[Amit Varma]: And that's why it was such a massive disaster.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But then, you know, it tried to attack a system which is in place, the black money system,
[Guest]: you had, you know, these things of unravelling that system overnight.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but the idea was an act of mass coercion that led to, it was an act of mass coercion
[Amit Varma]: and that led to less freedom in that short term that had happened.
[Amit Varma]: Because dismantling agricultural markets slowly would actually remove coercion and would lead
[Amit Varma]: to more freedom.
[Amit Varma]: My point is not that you do it over time.
[Amit Varma]: My whole point is and my point also has a dilemma.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a panacea and I'll get to that because that's the next question I'm going to ask
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: But I think what happens is that not only are agricultural markets controlled strongly
[Amit Varma]: by government and thus perverting the incentives for the farmers and leading to situations
[Amit Varma]: like this, but because of that private markets also can't operate and information that spreads
[Amit Varma]: everywhere through market signals like prices don't otherwise get going.
[Amit Varma]: But leave that aside, even assume, let's for a moment have a thought experiment where all
[Amit Varma]: of this doesn't exist.
[Amit Varma]: And we are a libertarian utopia and the market works perfectly.
[Amit Varma]: And let's assume that even in that situation, Punjab happens not to be semi-arid as it actually
[Amit Varma]: is, but it has enough water and rice is something natural for it to grow.
[Amit Varma]: And there's enough demand for it to grow all of it.
[Amit Varma]: So assume that despite those perverted, if those incentives don't exist, but the conditions
[Amit Varma]: are different, they're still growing that much rice and they're still burning the struggle
[Amit Varma]: and the externalities of that, that is the harsh side effects of that are being felt
[Amit Varma]: by the people of Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of solutions would then exist in that state of being?
[Guest]: I mean, then you'll have to essentially penalize them for damaging the environment.
[Amit Varma]: And this incentivize them.
[Amit Varma]: So something like the famous carbon tax that people talk about.
[Guest]: And then you basically have to ensure that the price of rice that is produced in Punjab
[Guest]: essentially takes the cost of destroying the environment into account as well.
[Guest]: Once that is done, automatically that rice will become more expensive.
[Guest]: And in comparison to rice being produced in a state like West Bengal.
[Amit Varma]: And the demand will go down and they'll have to shift to something else.
[Amit Varma]: So the optimal solution is that you a, figure out a penalty on burning struggle and find
[Amit Varma]: a way to, with given state capacity, find a way to enforce that so that it actually
[Amit Varma]: becomes unprofitable for the farmers to grow rice because their costs go up and they have
[Guest]: to shift to wheat.
[Guest]: But then that will never happen essentially because political parties have elections to
[Amit Varma]: win.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Which holds true for any solution.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it seems that poor KGV will keep tweeting about this, but there's nothing he can do.
[Amit Varma]: At least, you know, not nothing in the near future.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek, thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: It was great having you.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks for having me, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed the show, do head over to your nearest bookstore, which is probably Amazon,
[Amit Varma]: to pick up one of Vivek's books, either the Easy Money Trilogy or his latest book, which
[Amit Varma]: I highly recommend India's Big Government.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow him on Twitter at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-E-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse earlier episodes of the Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, if you enjoy listening to the Scene and the Unseen every week, but you're worried
[Amit Varma]: about how much it affects your productivity, we have a solution for you.
[Amit Varma]: Another podcast.
[Amit Varma]: Every fortnight, Vishal Gondal tries to identify the tools and hacks employed by super achievers
[Amit Varma]: from different walks of life through in-depth conversations.
[Amit Varma]: Episodes are out every alternate Wednesday.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, learn.
[Unknown]: Excuse me, bhaiya.
[Unknown]: Excuse me.
[Unknown]: Bole madam.
[Unknown]: Menu mein kya hai?
[Unknown]: Menu mein Scene Unseen hai, podcast hai, on course hai, Cyrus says hai, Marry in India,
[Unknown]: Rediscovery Project, Empowering Series, Sex Wax hai, IVM likes hai, Simplified hai, Keeping
[Unknown]: it Queer hai, Tingson Destinations hai, My Neighbor Zuckerberg hai, and The Fan Garage
[Unknown]: hai.
[Unknown]: Aapko kya chahiye hai?
[Unknown]: Ek baar repeat kar denge kya?
[Unknown]: Repeat repeat nahi karta hum.
[Unknown]: Aap jaao ivmpodcast.com pe aur suno yeh sab.
[Unknown]: Ya phir download karo unka app.
[Unknown]: Aapin maureen, teri maise pala par aapki hu.